---
title: "Gordon Reserve"
excerpt: "Two men, one name, and one park."
---

Say that one day you decide to go and sit in the park.

![A photograph of a small public park containing palm trees and a fountain in
the centre.](/images/gordon/gordon_wide.avif)

There's a pretty dramatic sign telling you the park's name.

![A photograph of a large metal sign reading 'Gordon Reserve' in a stately
typeface. A standing metal figure is visible in the
corner.](/images/gordon/gordon_sign.avif)

So who is this Gordon? Well, you walked past a statue on your way in, so maybe
that's him?

![A photograph of a metal statue of a relaxed-looking man seated in a
chair. The small sandstone plinth reads "Adam Lindsay
Gordon".](/images/gordon/gordon_adam_lindsay.avif)

Well that was easy! But, um, there's a much bigger statue right there (you can
see it in the bottom right corners of the first two photos). Who's that guy if
he gets a bigger statue, but they didn't name the park after him?

![A photograph of a large metal statue of a standing man in military dress, on
top of a tall sandstone plinth, which identifies him as "Charles George
Gordon".](/images/gordon/gordon_charles_george.avif)

Huh. Two Gordons? And the vibes of the statues are very different. Adam Lindsay
died earlier than Charles George, but his statue is smaller and less prominent.
Which one is the park named after?

Charles George Gordon was a British military officer who never set foot in
Australia. It seems to me that the sculpture was [crowdfunded in
1887](https://www.emelbourne.net.au/biogs/EM02037b.htm), two years after
Gordon's death, something that would be pretty bizarre today, I reckon. 

Adam Lindsay Gordon was a poet who "wrote the first great songs this land can
claim to be their own", according to a quote on base of that sculpture. I'd
never heard of him previously but I know very little of poetry or of Australian
literature. [A contemporary *Age*
article](https://trove.nla.gov.au/newspaper/article/205496116) says that the
sculpture of this Gordon was unveiled in 1932, and I think the sculpture of the
other Gordon was already there — "Mr. Holland, M.I.A., contrasted Gordon the
poet with Gordon the Christian soldier, whose noble statue adorns another corner
of this triangular reserve" (transcription my own, and possibly imperfect).

Ok, so Gordon Reserve must be named after the soldier, right? His statue was
there first. But the article in *The Age* doesn't call it that, only referring
to "that portion of the Spring-street reserve which was once occupied by the
Eight Hours memorial" (I think that they're referring to that obelisk up on the
corner of Victoria and Russel Streets, diagonally opposite Trades Hall; see
[here](https://vhd.heritagecouncil.vic.gov.au/places/126782)). 

So I figure the only explanation is that this park was named Gordon Reserve
*after both men*. It would be absurd to name it after one but not the other,
when they both have a statue in the park, right?

The [Victorian heritage
register](https://vhd.heritagecouncil.vic.gov.au/places/126782) (same link as
above) says it was not renamed Gordon Reserve until the 1960s, but provides no
specific details. Apparently, the two Gordons knew each other,[^1] so maybe they
wouldn't object to sharing the naming rights.

The photos above were taken on a Nikon D500 with a Sigma 18–35mm 1:1.8 lens and
are straight out of the camera (mostly).

[^1]: [Adam Lindsay's Wikipedia article](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adam_Lindsay_Gordon) cites a [book from 1912](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adam_Lindsay_Gordon#CITEREFSladen1912) for this claim and I'm not dedicated enough to head to the library to check this out. The *Age* article seems to suggest it, too, with the Mr. Holland, from before, saying that "the soldier was reputed to have been a [scan is unclear; I think it says 'contact'] of the poet".
